HARI SREENIVASAN: Good evening.
I'm Hari Sreenivasan.
Judy Woodruff is away.
On tonight's "PBS NewsHour": the
first hurricane
to hit the U.S. mainland in more
than a decade
makes landfall.
As Florida recovers, the East
Coast braces
for the storm's remaining
impact.
Also ahead: The FBI releases
excerpts of its
interview with Hillary Clinton,
what's in
the documents, and how could it
impact the
election.
Then: Five years later, a
Missouri city hit
by a devastating tornado is
rebuilt from the
ruin, physically and
emotionally.
MAURICE AUBREY, Student: Now we
have this
single past experience that
links us all together,
as before.
So, it just makes it -- it's
made it so much
better, I think.
HARI SREENIVASAN: And it's
Friday.
Mark Shields and David Brooks
are here to
analyze the full week of news.
All that and more on tonight's
"PBS NewsHour."
(BREAK)
HARI SREENIVASAN: It has been a
rough day
across Northern Florida, thanks
to Hurricane
Hermine.
And now much of the Atlantic
Seaboard is under
threat.
William Brangham begins our
coverage.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Hermine
barreled ashore
in Florida's Big Bend region on
the Gulf Coast
around 1:30 this morning.
It battered beaches with winds
of 80 miles
an hour and flooded towns with
storm surge
and heavy downpours.
WOMAN: We get out of bed, the
water is ankle-deep,
and go and open the door.
Floodwaters come rushing in.
Now the water inside the house
is knee-deep.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Adding to the
mess, the
storm tore up trees and snapped
power lines,
affecting thousands of people.
Governor Rick Scott declared a
state of emergency
for more than 50 counties.
WOMAN: And evacuate immediately.
GOV.
RICK SCOTT (R), Florida: The
number one thing
is to stay safe.
Do not drive in standing water.
Stay away from downed power
lines.
Just because it's clear outside
doesn't mean
it's safe.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: From the Gulf
Coast, the
storm moved inland and weakened
as it pushed
across Southern Georgia and the
Carolinas.
It's expected to regain some of
its power
if the storm moves out over
warmer water in
the Atlantic.
That had North Carolina Governor
Pat McCrory
and others waiting and hoping.
GOV.
PAT MCCRORY (R), North Carolina:
We're going
to see who gets hit the hardest,
and hopefully
no one will get hard hit at all.
Again, our goal is to be
overprepared and
underwhelmed when it comes to
this storm.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: The
Mid-Atlantic states
may face the worst of Hermine.
It's projected to stall offshore
this weekend,
with the potential for historic
levels of
beach erosion and coastal
flooding.
Already, Labor Day weekend
events up and down
the coast were being canceled or
delayed.
But, today, at least, officials
in Georgia
said the effects were less
damaging than feared,
and surfers even took advantage
of big waves
near Savannah.
Back in Florida, there were
other concerns.
The state has already reported
dozens of cases
of Zika virus, and the storm's
passage will
now leave countless pools of
standing water,
ideal breeding grounds for the
mosquitoes
that transmit Zika.
HARI SREENIVASAN: William will
be back with
what's behind the recent absence
of hurricanes
hitting the U.S. mainland after
the news summary.
In the day's other news: Job
creation in August
came in lighter than expected.
The Labor Department reports a
net gain of
151,000 positions, far below the
gains of
recent months.
The unemployment rate for August
stayed at
4.9 percent for the third month
in a row.
The weaker numbers could
influence the Federal
Reserve to wait until year's end
before raising
interest rates again.
The man who ruled Uzbekistan
with an iron
hand, Islam Karimov, has died of
a stroke.
His government confirmed it
today.
Karimov took power in the
Central Asian nation
in 1989, and was widely
condemned for brutally
repressing all dissent.
Even so, after 9/11, the U.S.
used an Uzbek
air base for airstrikes on
Afghanistan.
The deal collapsed when
Karimov's troops machine-gunned
700 protesters in 2005.
Russian President Vladimir Putin
said today
he doesn't know who hacked
Democratic Party
organizations in the U.S.
The cyber-attack led to the
release of thousands
of e-mails and documents, and
U.S. intelligence
agencies have pointed to Russian
hackers.
But in a new interview with
Bloomberg News,
Putin says the culprits could be
from anywhere.
VLADIMIR PUTIN, Russian
President (through
translator): There are so many
hackers nowadays,
and they act so meticulously and
so precisely.
They camouflage their activity
to pretend
that they were some other
hackers from other
territories or others countries.
At a state level, Russia is
definitely not
involved in this.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Putin also
said Moscow has
no intention of trying to
interfere in the
U.S. election.
A gunman who killed a security
agent at Los
Angeles International Airport
will avoid the
death penalty.
Instead, Paul Ciancia gets life
in prison,
under a plea deal on murder and
other charges.
In 2013, he shot a federal
screening officer
a dozen times, and wounded three
others.
A former Stanford University
swimmer walked
out of jail today in a sexual
assault case
that caused a national outcry.
Brock Turner served half of a
six-month sentence
for attacking an unconscious
woman after heavy
drinking at a party.
The victim complained the
sentence was far
too lenient.
That sparked widespread
criticism of the judge
and the system, and, this week,
state lawmakers
approved mandatory prison terms
for what Turner
did.
Samsung is recalling its
brand-new Galaxy
Note 7 smartphones because the
batteries can
explode or catch fire.
Today's announcement came just
two weeks after
the product's launch.
Samsung says there have been 35
cases of Note
7s burning or exploding out of
2.5 million
sold worldwide.
And on Wall Street, the Dow
Jones industrial
average gained 72 points to
close near 18492.
The Nasdaq rose 22 points, and
the S&P 500
added nine.
For the week, all three indexes
gained about
half-a-percent.
Still to come on the "NewsHour":
what Hermine
tells us about weather patterns;
rebuilding
Joplin, Missouri, five years
after a tornado
flattened much of the city;
delving into the
FBI's report on Hillary
Clinton's e-mails;
and much more.
FBI's report on Hillary
Clinton's e-mails;
and much more.
With Hermine heading up the East
Coast of
the U.S., we take a closer look
at the science
and frequency of these
hurricanes.
William Brangham is back with
more.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Hurricane
Hermine is the
first major hurricane to hit the
United States
in 10 years.
Sandy, which did tremendous
damage in 2012,
wasn't a hurricane when it came
ashore.
So, why such a long period of
time since the
last major hurricane?
To help answer that, I'm joined
by Sean Sublette.
He is a meteorologist with the
research group
Climate Central.
So, Sean, just take on this
question.
Not that anyone is really
complaining about
this, but why have we gone 10
years since
the last major storm hit the
U.S.?
SEAN SUBLETTE, Climate Central:
We really
have been lucky at this point.
Weather patterns change from
year to year,
and the Atlantic Basin has been
active over
the past decade or so, but the
steering winds
at any given time have largely
directed the
major hurricanes away from the
continental
United States.
Now, to remember, a major
hurricane, by definition,
is a Category 3 or greater
storm, a 3, 4 or
5.
Hermine was a Category 1 storm,
and, like
Sandy, certainly doing a lot of
flood damage,
but did not really attain what
we technically
define as a major hurricane.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: One of the
things I know
is that a lot of the climate
models initially
had predicted that if the
temperature globally
goes up, which it has, and
oceans have gotten
warmer, which they also have,
that we would
see more of these storms and a
greater frequency
of the storms.
So, are these models somehow
contradicted
by this last decade?
SEAN SUBLETTE: Not necessarily.
I think what most of them have
begun to indicate,
really, if you go back to the
most recent
IPCC analysis, or the
consolidation of the
research, is that they're not
necessarily
going to become more frequent,
but there is
going to be the tendency or at
least likelihood
that the ones that do form are
going to have
more intense rain and very
likely stronger
winds, so that the ones that do
manage to
develop will likely be stronger.
And the fact that sea level has
continued
to rise, as a lot of the polar
regions have
seen the glacial ice melt, that
will compound
any kind of storm surge flooding
that comes
from hurricanes.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: So, this last
10 years and
the models that you're
describing, they don't
really help us understand what
the next 10
years could look like for the
U.S.?
SEAN SUBLETTE: Yes, for the very
short term,
there is not an awful lot of
skill with those
particular batches of climate
models.
The shorter term is really kind
of an area
that most of the work needs to
be done, but
we do look for the longer-term
trends when
we think about climate change,
as climate
change is a longer-term
phenomenon, on the
order of decades to a century,
vs. so much
several years to a decade.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: So, let's go
back to Hermine,
which is now threatening the
Atlantic Seaboard.
We have got something like 30
million people
up and down the coast that might
be looking
at some glimpse of the storm.
What are we likely to see this
weekend and
into next week?
SEAN SUBLETTE: What we're really
concerned
about going forward into
tomorrow, as the
center of storm goes up the
southeastern coast,
affects Hampton Roads, Virginia,
and then,
as we alluded to earlier on in
the broadcast,
going off New Jersey or Delmarva
Peninsula,
and likely just stalling for two
or three
days, and may attain hurricane
status once
again.
But, really, the biggest story
is going to
be the tremendous coastal
flooding.
If this system just hangs off
the New Jersey
or Delmarva Peninsula and spins
for two or
three days, you will have a
broad area of
winds coming onshore.
That will likely lead to some
serious coastal
flooding.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: So, why is the
stalling
important?
I take it you're saying, we
would prefer it
to just rush through more
quickly?
SEAN SUBLETTE: Absolutely.
Most of the time, once these
systems push
northward, they begin to
accelerate back out
to sea.
The steering winds, however,
with this particular
system look like they are going
to set up
so that it's going to stall once
it clears
off the Virginia Capes and just
offshore,
only 100 miles or.
So, if it just sits and spins in
that counterclockwise
direction, you have a continuous
fetch of
water onto shore from those
strong northeasterly
winds.
And that's what's going to pile
up the water
along the coast.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: All right,
Sean Sublette
from Climate Central, thanks
very much.
SEAN SUBLETTE: Thank you.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Storms,
hurricanes and natural
disasters clearly test the
fortitude of any
area, as we're seeing this
weekend with Hermine,
and just recently with the rains
and flooding
in Louisiana.
We tend to focus on the
immediate aftermath
and relief, but the devastation
can last for
years.
We have the story of how one
city leveled
by a tornado has spent years
rebuilding, and
in some ways is better and
stronger for the
future.
The tornado that struck Joplin,
Missouri,
on May 22, 2011 was one of the
most destructive
ever in U.S. history; 161 people
were killed,
1,000 were injured, and more
than 7,000 homes
were damaged.
When the "NewsHour" visited four
months later,
people were still literally
picking up the
pieces of their lives.
JANE CAGE, Former Chair,
Citizens Advisory
Council: It is certainly clean,
compared with
what it used to be.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Jane Cage, a
businesswoman
who chaired the Citizens
Advisory Council
to rebuild Joplin, told us back
then she was
worried people wouldn't come
back to the destroyed
areas.
JANE CAGE: In the beginning, I
think everyone
said, I want to rebuild my
house.
And now I think people are faced
with the
reality that what they wanted,
their neighborhood
and their friends may not be in
that same
spot.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Five years
later, Cage took
us on a tour of the same
neighborhood.
JANE CAGE: I think this is, in
some ways,
one of the best recovered
neighborhoods.
They're nicer houses and larger
houses overall.
HARI SREENIVASAN: She says one
of the main
things that Joplin got right in
the aftermath
was encouraging residents to
stay.
JANE CAGE: We concentrated on
keeping our
population in Joplin, because we
saw what
happened in other cities that
experienced
disasters.
And I think one of the first
things that we
did to make that happen was, our
school superintendent
made the promise that we would
start school
on time.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Five schools
were completely
wiped out in the storm,
including Joplin High
School.
When we visited in 2011, classes
had just
begun in an abandoned shopping
mall.
Now a brand-new state-of-the-art
high school
has opened on the original site.
It's just across the street from
where sophomore
Blake Dean's house was
flattened.
Dean described how he rode out
the storm in
a backyard shelter.
BLAKE DEAN, Student: Sure
enough, we start
hearing a kind of freight train
noise.
And it just starts getting
really loud and
the pressure starts building.
And then we all kind of just
huddled up in
the shelter, and it just blew
over it.
HARI SREENIVASAN: His family
chose to rebuild
on the same lot a bigger and
better house.
And he says the school is also
bigger and
better.
BLAKE DEAN: Oh, it's just
awesome.
It's so -- I mean, it's so much
bigger than
the last one and there's so much
more opportunity.
HARI SREENIVASAN: In fact,
bigger and better
is how many in Joplin now
describe the city
as a whole.
The population has actually
grown by 1,000
people over the last five years.
And fellow high school football
player Maurice
Aubrey says the sense of
community has become
stronger too.
MAURICE AUBREY, Student: Now we
have this
single past experience that
links us all together,
as before.
So, it just makes it -- it's
made it so much
better, I think.
MARCINDA HEMPEN, Joplin,
Missouri: My complex
was this portion right here, and
my apartment
was right here.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Marcinda
Hempen is one of
those people who took advantage
of those new
opportunities.
She was living in an apartment
and huddled
in the bathtub when the storm
passed through.
MARCINDA HEMPEN: The weirdest
thing was, after
it was all done, it was so quiet
that I thought,
am I dead?
Did I not make it?
Is this what it's like to be
dead?
HARI SREENIVASAN: Hempen, a
single mom of
two now-grown boys, said, prior
to the storm,
she couldn't afford to buy a
house, but thanks
to a $20 million federal loan
program which
helped her with a down-payment,
she owns a
home in one of the hardest-hit
areas.
MARCINDA HEMPEN: It's still a
little unreal.
I own this.
This is all mine.
I can paint a wall.
I can do whatever I want to do,
and nobody
can tell me different.
HARI SREENIVASAN: The
community-wide effort,
along with help from all levels
of government
and hundreds of volunteer
organizations from
around the country, has changed
the face of
the city.
Nearly 2,000 new homes have been
built; 300
new businesses have opened.
And thanks to $30 million from
the federal
government, the city has a new
sewer system,
new electrical grid, and new
storm shelters
in every school and public
building.
There are also new parks,
complete with basketball
courts, playgrounds and water
features.
St. John's Mercy Hospital, which
was completely
destroyed, has been rebuilt on a
new site,
and has $11 million worth of
upgrades to protect
from future tornadoes, including
windows that
can sustain winds up to 250
miles an hour,
fortified safe zones on every
floor, and a
450-foot reinforced tunnel,
which houses generators,
water and data communications.
But for all of the signs of new
growth in
Joplin, there is one area where
the healing
has been more difficult.
Cases of mental distress and
trauma have more
than doubled over the past five
years, affecting
people like Marian Kelly, who
showed us the
crawl space where she rode out
thee storm.
MARIAN KELLY, Joplin, Missouri:
But, at some
point I felt the air getting
sucked out of
the crawl space around me.
And I thought, this is how I'm
going to die.
HARI SREENIVASAN: She was
relatively lucky.
Her house was damaged, but not
destroyed,
and she emerged with just some
cuts and bruises.
But the emotional scars have
been much deeper.
MARIAN KELLY: For me, the
post-traumatic stress
disorder has manifested itself
mostly in a
heightened emotional response to
things.
I get anxious or upset in ways
that I wouldn't
have before.
Also, the concentration issues
are there.
That's why there's alarms for
everything on
my phone.
That's why everything has to be
written down.
HARI SREENIVASAN: She has been
able to hold
down a job, but she says that's
thanks to
medication and regular
counseling sessions.
She's not sure she will ever
fully recover.
MARIAN KELLY: It's been
difficult for me to
accept that I might not get all
of this back,
the things that I have lost.
I have shaved off a few I.Q.
points, you know?
And I don't know if I can expect
there -- to
get them back.
HARI SREENIVASAN: While Kelly
still struggles
with her memories of that
terrible day, she
is proud of the city for showing
such resilience
in the aftermath.
She is also hopeful that the
many young people
who have moved to Joplin since
the storm will
bring new energy and life to the
community.
That new life is evident in the
downtown,
which had been largely abandoned
before the
tornado hit.
Now it's dotted with hip
restaurants, bars
and lofts.
Rachel Grindle, who just moved
to Joplin from
Long Beach, California, is
impressed.
RACHEL GRINDLE, Joplin,
Missouri: Our first
week living in Joplin, we were
invited to
Friday night wine share, which
is this networking
group for people our age who are
career-minded
and city-focused.
And after that, everybody came
here to Infuxn
afterwards.
And we went out to dinner after
that.
And I looked at my husband, and
I was like,
I feel like we're living more of
the L.A.
lifestyle in Joplin than we ever
did in Long
Beach.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Reminders of
the storm can
still be found everywhere in
Joplin, whether
it's the memorials to the people
who lost
their lives, or to the miles and
miles of
treeless neighborhoods.
But five years later, the signs
of progress
that have emerged from that
tragic day have
become a model for other
communities who have
suffered catastrophic disasters.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm Hari
Sreenivasan.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Stay with us.
Coming up on the "NewsHour": the
controversy
over an NFL quarterback refusing
to stand
for the national anthem; and
Mark Shields
and David Brooks take on the
week's news.
But, first: Today, the FBI
released two key
documents about its
investigation into the
private e-mail server Hillary
Clinton used
when she was secretary of state.
One contains the agency's notes
from Clinton's
FBI interview, and the other is
a 47-page
summary of the FBI's findings.
NPR's Carrie Johnson is covering
the story
and joins me now.
So, what's new about the
documents that were
released today?
CARRIE JOHNSON, NPR: There are
several new
details, including really a
sense of what
Hillary Clinton told FBI
investigators in
that three-and-a-half-hour
interview at FBI
headquarters on July 2.
Hari, she said she used this
personal server
as a matter of convenience.
She never had a concern that she
or anybody
close to her was mishandling
classified information,
and that she actually doesn't
recall attending
a security briefing or any kind
of training
about open records lawsuits or
open records
laws, which is interesting,
because these
materials only came out after a
host of FOIA
requests from news organizations
and calls
from Republicans in Congress.
HARI SREENIVASAN: And there was
-- one of
the e-mails -- or at least one
of the quotes
that we have is about a drone
program.
I think we can put that up.
It says, "Clinton stated" --
this is the FBI
saying: "Clinton stated
deliberation over
a future drone strike didn't
give her cause
for concern regarding
classification."
Is this willful oversight,
ignorance?
Was she too busy?
What were the reasons that they
gave?
CARRIE JOHNSON: Recall, Hari,
that the FBI
director, James Comey, has said
that Hillary
Clinton and closest aides were
extremely careless
with government secrets, but he
didn't find
enough evidence to prosecute
anyone for wrongdoing.
That said, these new documents
today include
more information about what was
going through
her own e-mail server, a lot of
documents,
a lot of e-mails about the drone
program,
one of the government's most
secret tools
in the national security space,
to allow officials
at the CIA and the Pentagon to
engage in extrajudicial
killing of terrorists or
would-be terrorists
overseas.
And what Hillary Clinton was
asked about by
the FBI were a number of e-mails
about targeted
killings about to happen,
disputes between
different government agencies
about who should
be targeted for those kinds of
drone strikes
and other things.
What Hillary Clinton said in
response to FBI
questions was mainly, listen, I
relied on
career State Department
officials to make
determinations about what should
be classified
and what shouldn't.
She also said that these
programs were the
subject of multiple debates in
media, in newspapers,
on television and the like.
And, often, her aides were
passing around
articles from newspapers about
drone strikes.
So, she thought it was OK to
write about that.
HARI SREENIVASAN: At one point,
I remember
FBI Director Comey saying that
no reasonable
prosecutor would take this case.
I mean, there's also a little
bit of controversy
on just the releasing of these
notes from
an interview or this sort of a
summary finding.
CARRIE JOHNSON: Hari, it's
enormously controversial
among Democrats, who believe
that this could
further cement a sense in the
political campaign
that Hillary Clinton is
secretive or may have
character problems.
And it's enormously
controversial among some
senior Justice Department
officials from past
administrations, with whom I
spoke today.
They said, when you decide not
to bring charges
against somebody, you shouldn't
dump all kinds
of derogatory information about
them out into
the public space.
In fact, one of them e-mailed me
this afternoon
saying, can you imagine the
political careers
that would be ended if the
Justice Department
decided to release these
sensitive case materials
in all the matters in which we
decline to
prosecute people?
Where to draw the line here?
So there is some sense that this
could set
a precedent for demands from
Congress and
reporters for a lot of sensitive
information
on closed cases on national
security and public
corruption moving forward.
HARI SREENIVASAN: All right,
Carrie Johnson
of NPR joining us, thanks so
much.
CARRIE JOHNSON: Thank you.
HARI SREENIVASAN: But, first:
Athletes have
had a long tradition of being
activists with
their political protests.
The latest case is of San
Francisco 49ers
quarterbacks Colin Kaepernick's
refusal to
stand for the national anthem at
football
games.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Kaepernick
also said he
would donate $1 million in
charity to some
of the causes he believes in.
For more on the Kaepernick
controversy and
the broader context, we turn to
William Rhoden,
a former sports columnist for
The New York
Times who has long written on
the subject.
First, your thoughts on what's
been happening
this past week.
WILLIAM C. RHODEN, The New York
Times: Well,
you know, it's pretty
phenomenal, the controversy,
but, in a way, I think we should
probably
thank Kaepernick, because he's
really gotten
this into a deeper history of
the anthem,
of the author of the anthem, of
the background
Francis Scott
Key slaves.
And there was this very
controversial third
stanza of the national anthem,
which, you
know, maybe talks about being
very kind of
unsympathetic to slaves.
So, I think that it has been
good in one sense,
in that it's gotten the country
to really
think a lot more deeply about
who we are as
a nation and a lot of our
hypocrisy.
I think, in terms of Kaepernick,
I think it
has also once again made us
realize the power
of athletes, of these people who
are in these
very prominent positions
because, you know,
sports is sort of the cultural
-- has become
maybe one of the primary
cultural foundations
of this country.
And now that you're having
especially, particularly
young African-American men who
are beginning
to realize -- A, they're
becoming much more
fluent in our history and are
really becoming
unafraid to use this podium to
express views
that are controversial and not
controversial,
and using this sort of national
anthem as
sort of the lightning rod, you
know, for a
lot of these controversies.
So, I think it's really been --
it's really
been fascinating.
HARI SREENIVASAN: But athletes
have had a
long history of being outwardly
political,
active in social causes.
WILLIAM C. RHODEN: Right.
HARI SREENIVASAN: We're quick to
think about
Muhammad Ali.
We're quick to think about the
moment at the
Olympics when the fists were
raised up.
WILLIAM C. RHODEN: Right.
HARI SREENIVASAN: But there was
also a pretty
good quiet spell where athletes
chose not
to be involved.
WILLIAM C. RHODEN: Yes, when the
-- as the
money started increasing.
I came of age from -- you know,
when I was
16 years old, Jim Brown suddenly
announced
his retirement from the game
because his owner,
Arthur Modell, Art Modell, has
sort of been
chiding him about not reporting
to training
camp because he was filming
movies.
And, at that point, Brown was 29
years old,
was the greatest player ever.
And, basically, he held a press
conference
on the movie set and said, I'm
done.
When I was 17 years old, Ali
said that he
wasn't going to fight in
Vietnam.
When I was 18, it was Smith and
Carlos at
the '68 Mexico Olympics with the
salute.
So, that was sort of my
politicization.
And that is how I became -- this
is how athletes
should react and should respond
publicly.
Then I think you mentioned that
long stretch
of time.
I think what happened is that,
as the money
really became -- started to
enter -- play
a more prominent part, and
people got agents
now, now athletes started
getting agents,
and agents were saying, hey,
man, you know,
let's take the path of least
resistance.
Now, you know, I guess the
question is, why
all of a sudden are we coming
back to this?
Why do you have some of the
greatest names
in sports, LeBron James, Dwyane
Wade, you
know, Chris Paul, Carmelo
Anthony...
HARI SREENIVASAN: Michael
Jordan.
WILLIAM C. RHODEN: Yes, Michael
-- well, that's
another story.
HARI SREENIVASAN: I mean, I
bring Michael
Jordan up because I would say
that he was
in the quiet period, right?
He was one of the athletes that
did not -- didn't
take a position.
WILLIAM C. RHODEN: Oh, well, you
know what?
HARI SREENIVASAN: And here he is
just a few
weeks ago deciding to give a
million to two
different organizations.
WILLIAM C. RHODEN: For a long
time, Michael
Jordan became the model of what
an athlete,
a black athlete should be, which
is neutral,
because you want to take money
from both sides.
You don't want to make anybody
angry.
You want to placate the white
audience.
As he famously was quoted as
saying, Republicans
buy sneakers, too.
And I think that, because of his
prominence
and because how great he was as
an athlete,
that sort of became the standard
for a lot
of athletes, is this whole
politically neutral
stance.
And I think that it's
interesting that -- and,
as you mentioned a couple of
weeks ago, he
donated money to both sides, the
police side
and to the NAACP Legal Defense
Fund.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Right.
WILLIAM C. RHODEN: Also, I think
a lot of
athletes realize that, what is
the power structure
going to do?
You have got a league, an NBA,
that's almost
80 percent African-American
players.
The National Football League is
almost 70
percent of African-American
players.
Are they going to fire
everybody?
Are they going to punish
I think that what we're seeing
is a lot of
athletes not being afraid to
roar, whether
you agree with it or not.
HARI SREENIVASAN: All right,
William Rhoden
joining us from New York
tonight, thanks so
much.
WILLIAM C. RHODEN: My pleasure.
HARI SREENIVASAN: We turn to the
week in politics,
which included, yes, a surprise
campaign detour
to Mexico.
And that means we turn to the
analysis of
Shields and Brooks.
That's syndicated columnist Mark
Shields and
New York Times columnist David
Brooks joining
us this week from New York.
All right, Mark Shields, start.
Let's go with Mexico for topic
one.
This is the surprise trip,
Donald Trump, not
so surprising, but really a
shortly planned
trip to Mexico that he took.
Now, first the moment itself.
He came across looking
presidential.
MARK SHIELDS: He did.
Peter Hart, the Democratic
pollster, said
that Donald Trump could win this
campaign
if he had one sane month.
And I think an awful lot of
Democrats were
quite nervous on Wednesday
afternoon, when
this sort of thoughtful, almost
statesmanlike
Donald Trump showed up at a
joint session
with the president of Mexico.
He listened.
It was the longest he had ever
been on camera
without speaking that I can
recall, and almost
came across, I don't want to say
presidential,
but it was flirting with that,
until, of course,
he returned to his native land,
in Phoenix,
totally altered and contradicted
that impression
with his stem-winder of a
speech, basically
saying we're going to round up
anybody who's
an undocumented immigrant in
this country.
HARI SREENIVASAN: David, what
about that,
both the moment and when he came
back, the
policy?
DAVID BROOKS: Yes.
First, I would point out he has
had a sane
month, but it's been spread over
70 years.
But he had that moment.
He can utter a sane moment for
that time in
Mexico, but, when he came back,
tonally, he
just returned to himself.
To pay tribute to Donald Trump,
he's incapable
of being a phony.
And one of the things he does
express is the
true belief, or at least his
belief, that
America is besieged, besieged by
foreigners
who threaten us with crime, with
terrorism,
with cultural decay, with job
loss.
And that is how he got into this
race.
And that is what he's expressing
in Phoenix.
And the substance of what he
said in Phoenix
was actually quietly almost
moderate, I think,
but the tone is much more
important.
And the tone is the same old
hostility to
immigration.
And that will be politically
determinative.
The only people in America who
really cotton
on to that kind of message are a
certain section
of the Republican Party.
It has really very little appeal
outside of
it.
MARK SHIELDS: Let me just pick
up on one thing
David said, Hari, and that is,
FOX News poll
this week, not exactly a liberal
organ, asked
the following question: What
about undocumented
immigrants who are currently
working in the
United States, do you favor
deporting as many
as possible or do you favor
setting up a system
for them to become legal
residents?
By a margin of 77 to 19,
Americans favor legal
status, rather than deporting.
And the includes 66 to 29
percent Republicans
believe that we ought to have
legal status.
So, David, I think, makes a
reasonable point.
And that is, Donald Trump must
believe this,
because it's not a rational
political position,
if he's interested in being
elected.
DAVID BROOKS: Yes.
MARK SHIELDS: So...
HARI SREENIVASAN: Go ahead,
David.
DAVID BROOKS: I would just add
that, if you
look at the substance of what's
being said
both by Clinton and Trump, you
can very easily
predict where we are going to
end up on immigration.
We are going to secure the
border.
We're not going to build a wall,
but we will
secure the border.
We will legalize in some form or
another the
people who are here.
And we will shift a little more
to a skills-based
system than a family
reunification system.
That's the basis of what is
going to happen.
And within all the violence and
all the Sturm
und Drang of a campaign,
substantively, the
parties are sort of heading in
that direction.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Mark, how
different is the
position that he's taken now, or
at least
in the last week, vs. what Mitt
Romney said
or vs. what really the policy is
today?
MARK SHIELDS: Mitt Romney's, of
course, was
self-deportation.
And Trump obviously includes
that as one of
his planks.
The difference is not simply in
tone and emphasis.
I mean, this has been the
centerpiece.
Mitt Romney -- it became an
issue in 2012,
but it wasn't the defining issue
of the campaign.
This was the defining issue for
Donald Trump,
by his own volition, when he
came in.
He made this an issue, not that
immigration
had not been a controversial
issue in the
country, but he made it the
centerpiece of
his candidacy.
And he has consistently spoken
in disparaging,
pejorative, ugly terms about
undocumented
-- there's no undocumented
immigrants who
graduated as valedictorians of
their school
or joined the United States
military and served
the country well.
He treats them all as though
they're criminal
suspects.
HARI SREENIVASAN: David Brooks,
I heard your
doubt on the building of the
wall and who
is going to pay for it.
Really, that has become one of
those, not
just slogans, but he repeats it
at every speech,
every opportunity he gets, not
so much in
front of the Mexican president,
but certainly
when he came back.
And you're saying, no, we won't
actually build
that wall?
DAVID BROOKS: Well, you know,
this isn't exactly
dog whistle politics.
It's just whistle politics.
If you look at the NBC/Wall
Street Journal
poll, when they ask people, what
are your
top issues you care about in
this country,
well, economy comes up very
high.
National security comes up very
Even the deficit has come up
reasonably high.
Only 6 percent list immigration
as one of
their top three issues.
It's not a major issue.
And the reason it's worked for
Trump is because
he's playing identity politics.
He's playing us vs. them
politics, basically
native whites against
foreigners.
And so the wall is not really a
wall.
I think most people know he's
not going to
actually going to build a wall,
and certainly
Mexico is not going to pay for
it.
It's a way to say, I'm for us,
against the
encroachments of them.
And in times of economic stress,
or among
people who feel economic stress,
there's unfortunately
a susceptibility of that kind of
identity
politics.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Mark, let's a
little bit
about the ground game that the
two candidates
have.
We had a report on it from Lisa
Desjardins
and Dan Bush earlier this week.
MARK SHIELDS: Right.
HARI SREENIVASAN: A pretty
significant disparity
in what Hillary Clinton already
has established,
certainly in key battleground
states.
The Trump campaign said that
they're going
to -- I think they have plans to
open 98 more.
But do these offices in these
states matter?
MARK SHIELDS: They do matter in
this sense.
If it's a close race, the idea
of being able
to contact and turn out your
supporters, that
is, to identify them and in many
cases to
persuade them, to find out what
it is that
they are interested and doubts
about or questions
they do have.
I would just point out, in 2008,
Barack Obama
had a rather spectacular ground
operation
in the field campaign.
And in four different states, in
Iowa, in
North Carolina, in Florida, and
Nevada, he
won the election on early
voting, that is,
the people who voted before
Election Day.
John McCain actually got more
votes on Election
Day, the 12 hours, the first
Tuesday after
the first Monday in November, in
which people
voted.
But he had built up such a
number, had Barack
Obama, that it was enough of a
cushion that
he could carry those states and
win the presidency.
So, yes, it is important, and
it's especially
important in a close race.
And in the state of Florida,
Adam Smith of
The Tampa Bay Times today
reported, and a
very respected political writer,
that, in
the state of Florida, Donald
Trump has one
field office.
Mitt Romney had 48 in 2012.
Hillary Clinton has 50 as of
today, and Donald
Trump has only one.
So, this is one area where his
campaign is
not really competitive.
HARI SREENIVASAN: David Brooks,
the Trump
campaign would probably say,
well, we're doing
pretty well, considering we only
have one.
DAVID BROOKS: Well, that's true
in the polls.
And I do think, if you look at
the ground
game, I think it's the effect,
the marginal
effect on the race is probably 2
percent,
3 percentage points, which is
significant,
given there will be 50 states,
and a certain
number of them in most elections
are going
to be close.
I think TV ads are about the
same.
So, we're shifting sort of on
the margin here,
at least in a normal race.
This race has been far from
normal.
And I think, basically -- I will
quote Peter
Hart, too -- he wrote a memo
today, which
I think was making the very
effective point,
is, the majority of people have
decided they
don't want to vote for Donald
Trump.
They just have to know they can
live with
Hillary Clinton for four years.
And so, if she can prove that
she's livable
with, then she's probably going
to probably
rack up a big victory.
But she hasn't done that.
Her popularity ratings are
sinking right now.
And I'm not sure they're sinking
because she's
campaigning too little or too
ineffectively
or because she's campaigning too
much.
I sort of suspect the latter,
and that she
would do better if she was even
quieter than
she is now.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Let's talk a
little bit
about that quietness since the
bump that she
got after the conventions and
some of the
criticism that Donald Trump got
after going
after the Khan family, right?
MARK SHIELDS: Right.
HARI SREENIVASAN: But she's
largely in August
been taking the time to raise
money.
And she has sort of stayed out
of the spotlight.
MARK SHIELDS: And raise money,
she did, what,
$140 million for her campaign
and the Democratic
Party.
And two events struck me.
I mean, she basically has been
in Martha's
Vineyard, Nantucket, the
Hamptons, the tony
suburbs of New York, Los
Angeles, San Francisco.
One event was a
$250,000-per-person entry
price.
I mean, those are boxcar
numbers.
Another was $200,000 for an
individual to
get in.
And I think that the question of
what she
does as a candidate, I mean, I
think she's
effective in small groups.
I think she's effective when she
shows empathy
and a personal side.
But she doesn't have the benefit
of the doubt
on the question of
trustworthiness and
transparency.
And they have been anything but
transparent
on this question of e-mails.
And e-mails -- I think the one
great moment
she had unscripted in this
campaign were the
Benghazi hearings, when, for 11
hours, she
stood there and sat there and
took and answered
and took on and basically
vanquished her Republican
interrogators on the House side.
But, since then, there is sort
of a closing
down and a lockdown, it seems to
me, and a
lack of transparency.
So, there is -- I think this
raises further
questions about her
trustworthiness.
HARI SREENIVASAN: David Brooks,
even today,
we had more information from the
FBI about
notes about the interview that
they had, the
long interview, and sort of a
summary of their
findings.
DAVID BROOKS: Yes, as far as we
know what
came out today, nothing really
transforms
our version of the story.
There is carelessness, but it's
mostly reiterating
the pattern of closedness, which
has been
going back 20 years, the pattern
of insularity,
the pattern of secrecy.
I don't know where that comes
from.
It's almost psychological at
this point.
I don't know if it has to do
with her marriage,
her upbringing, whatever it is.
She's just not an open and
transparent person.
But one of the things she has
been doing in
the last few weeks is preparing
for the debate.
And I do think she understands
that the Olympics
sort of changed the culture.
The country was super, super
into the election.
And then the Olympics came
along, and something
uplifting came along, and people
were saying,
hey, I can watch something on TV
that I enjoy
watching.
And I do think interest in the
campaign has
waned a little since then.
And it may not lock in,
especially for low-information
undecided voters, until that
debate.
And so, if she's spending a lot
of time trying
to make herself an attractive
and presentable
personality in that debate, that
may not be
the stupidest thing she could do
with this
period.
MARK SHIELDS: I would agree.
I think she has an advantage
going in the
debate, in that she has debated,
and she's
a good debater, and she's
debated under high-pressure
one-on-one situations.
Donald Trump has never been in a
one-on-one
debate, where, for 90 minutes,
you're one
of the two people on the firing
line.
The second thing is, to
disadvantage for Hillary
Clinton, is because she is such
a good debater,
because she is so knowledgeable
and thoroughly
prepared on all matters policy,
she's going
to go into this as the
overwhelming favorite.
And that's what happened to Al
Gore in 2000.
He took George W. Bush lightly.
It's what happened to Barack
Obama in the
first debate in 2012.
He took Mitt Romney too lightly.
And I think she and her campaign
are guarding
against this possibility.
HARI SREENIVASAN: All right,
Mark Shields,
David Brooks, thanks so much.
Next: a "NewsHour" shares.
Each summer, the federal
research vessel Tiglax
travels the length of the
Aleutian chain in
Alaska, ferrying scientists to
remote islands
to study wildlife.
Producer Eric Keto with Public
Media's Alaska's
Energy Desk recently took a tour
of the boat
when it docked in Dutch Harbor,
and sent us
this story
MAN: Welcome aboard.
It's call the research vessel
Tiglax.
It was commissioned in '86.
And she's been mostly in the
Aleutians her
whole life.
The people that want to
understand this chain
and understand the ecosystem
really come through
this boat.
And so I have had the
opportunity to meet
them all.
Hi.
Let's take a walk.
We have our staterooms that
handle 14 passengers.
Of course, you have got your
center room here.
Here's the galley, very
comfortable.
That's a half-eaten dessert
you're taking
a look at.
We got three freezers on board,
probably about
$21,000 worth of grocery in
April.
And we will grab gear and get
under way from
Homer, with our destination and
being -- the
furthest destination is
(INAUDIBLE).
So, the coolest thing about this
is just the
diversity of it.
Two weeks, you will be going to
sea lions.
Next you know, it's sea otters.
You will be doing a bird survey.
You have been working Department
of Energy.
Everybody that comes out here,
they are very
passionate about what they want
to do.
And they only have two weeks to
do it.
And it's our job to make sure we
show them
what they need to see and try to
get it done.
Welcome to the bridge.
We have what they call the
latest electronics.
(LAUGHTER)
MAN: They're real late.
She's almost 30 years old now
and still going
strong.
I have seen change.
I have seen things go on the
endangered species
list.
I have seen things come off the
endangered
species list.
It's a magnificent place.
And I'm hopeful.
HARI SREENIVASAN: And we will be
back shortly.
In the meantime, take a moment
to hear from
your local PBS station.
It's a chance to offer your
support, which
helps keep programs like ours on
It's a chance to offer your
support, which
helps keep programs like ours on
the air.
(BREAK)
HARI SREENIVASAN: Online right
now: They're
in your mattress, your tea and
on your face.
There are millions of species of
mites, some
helpful, and others not so much.
Our science team gets an
up-close and personal
look at these tiny creatures
with the help
of
a high-powered microscope.
Watch our Facebook Live video on
our Web site,
PBS.org/NewsHour.
Gwen Ifill is preparing for
"Washington Week,"
which airs later this evening --
Gwen.
GWEN IFILL: Hi, Hari.
American politics crosses the
border, as Donald
Trump searches for middle ground
on immigration.
American politics crosses the
border, as Donald
Trump searches for middle ground
on immigration.
And Hillary Clinton take the
debate back.
Is this campaign captivating
American voters
or alienating them??
Is this campaign captivating
American voters
or alienating them??
We will try to sort it out
tonight on "Washington
Week" -- Hari.
We will try to sort it out
tonight on "Washington
Week" -- Hari.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Thanks, Gwen.
On "PBS NewsHour" Saturday:
California's drought
is
On "PBS NewsHour" Saturday:
California's drought
is
in its fifth year, and now
health concerns
are on the rise, as
in its fifth year, and now
health concerns
are on the rise, as
some
wells have run dry.
That's tomorrow night on "PBS
NewsHour Weekend."
And we will be back right here
on Monday with
a look ahead to the post-Labor
Day sprint
to Election Day.
That's the "NewsHour" for
tonight.
I'm Hari Sreenivasan.
Have
a great weekend.
Thank you, and good night.